Information Technology:
Its Impact on Undergraduate Education in Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
Report on an NSF Workshop




National Science Foundation
Directorate for Education and Human Resources
Division of Undergraduate Education




            NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
            NSF 98-82
      T he National Science Foundation promotes and advances scientific progress
in the United States by competitively awarding grants for research and education in
the sciences, mathematics, and engineering.

     To get the latest information about program deadlines, to download copies of
NSF publications, and to access abstracts of awards, visit the NSF Web site at:

                           http://www.nsf.gov


  Location:                                                     4201 Wilson Blvd.
                                                              Arlington, VA 22230


  For General Information (NSF Information Center):                 (703) 306-1234


  TDD (for the hearing-impaired):                                   (703) 306-0090


  To Order Publications or Forms:

      Send an e-mail to:                                             pubs@nsf.gov

      or telephone:                                                 (301) 947-2722


  To Locate NSF Employees:                                          (703) 306-1234
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this report are those
of the participants, and do not necessarily represent the official views, opinions, or policy of
the National Science Foundation.
                                          Foreword
The National Science Foundation (NSF)'s Directorate for Education and Human Resources
(EHR) is responsible for providing national leadership and support for improving the quality
and accessibility of science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SME&T) education,
kindergarten through graduate school. In a nation  indeed a global economy
 increasingly based on information as its common currency, the provision of appropriate
information technology in addition to well prepared teachers, instructors and facilitators of
such powerful tools, must become a vital part of the entire educational continuum as we step
into the next century.

In order to be effective, the use of technology in education must involve not only the provision
of equipment such as computer hardware and software, but also the human aspects of essential
content, engaging presentation, effective pedagogy, appropriate evaluation, and widespread
dissemination. Communication and computing provide dynamic tools, placing nearly
continuous demands on financial reserves and human resources as equipment and professional
training are revised and upgraded. The NSF-hosted workshop presented in these proceedings
addressed these and other issues in order to define unique perspectives, concerns, and desirable
benefits of educational technology to a broad spectrum of constituents.

The notion of widespread, uniform access to information technology is not a trivial problem.
As more adults, paraprofessionals, and part-time students utilize the classroom or laboratory to
seek skills in the use of generic or specialized technology, we see that the traditional purviews
of academe now extend deep into the entire community. Regardless of the rapidity or
direction of change offered by exciting and revolutionary new technologies, the true challenge
for developing guiding principles for their appropriate implementation lies in the inclusion of
all students at all types of academic institutions, with secure and tangible links to the public and
private sectors. Again, while access for all, coherence in underlying infrastructure, and
compliance between the skills taught in school and those necessary in the workplace are
fundamental to this discussion, it is the collective effort of our human capital that will ensure
these powerful tools do not instead widen the gulf between the haves and the have-nots. As this
vast endeavor is begun, the cross-divisional and multidisciplinary activities will encourage
projects that create effective learning environments with the broadest possible access to them.



                                            Luther S. Williams
                                            Assistant Director
                                            Directorate for Education and Human Resources
Contents


Foreword                                                                i

Executive Summary                                                      v

Introduction                                                           1

I: The Discussion Begins                                               7

II: The 1996 Information Technology Workshop                           11
    Opening Remarks and the Charge by NSF                              11
    Workshop Agenda                                                    12
    Workshop Structure, Exchange of Ideas, and Constituents            13
    Breakout Session I: Perspectives of the Constituencies             14
    Breakout Session II: Evaluation and Dissemination of Information   18
                          Technology
    Breakout Session III: Thematic Discussion                          22
    Breakout Session IV: Future Directions and Recommendations         25

III: Follow-up to the Workshop                                         31

IV: Recommendations                                                    39

Appendix: Workshop Participants                                        43




                                       iii
Executive Summary
In April, 1996, the National Science Foundation convened a workshop for faculty,
students, academic administrators, publishers, and industry professionals to discuss the
use of information technology in higher education. The purpose of the meeting was: 1) to
identify prevailing themes and issues in the use of information technology and begin to
establish a common vocabulary for discussion; 2) to derive a general consensus on
effective and ineffective attributes and examples of information technology; and 3) to
initiate discussion on the role each stakeholder might play in a national effort to use such
technologies to enrich the educational experience of all undergraduates.

During the pre-meeting listserv discussion, participants called for a concise definition of
“information technology,” as applied to teaching and learning. Access for all and
examples of effective and ineffective attributes of information technology applications
were also proposed as issues in need of further discussion, as was the true costs of
using information technology on a large-scale.

In breakout group discussion during the three-day meeting, information technology (IT)
was used as an umbrella term to represent communication and computing tools, while
educational technology was used to denote the application of IT tools to teaching and
learning. Accordingly, educational technology could further be differentiated into
instructional technology (tools based in the delivery of educational material), and
learning technology, which is centered in the experience of the student. Collectively,
these technologies have the ability to provide access to world-wide resources; facilitate
the accumulation and presentation of data; and enable communication, interaction, and
collaboration among students and instructors to improve the practice of teaching and the
experience of learning.

Workshop participants identified effective information technology applications as those
that engage students with the material, illustrate complex systems or relationships, and
encourage interaction with other individuals or teams. Ultimately, the technology tools
should become transparent as they engage the user with the material, enabling
immersion in the learning process on an individual basis or as part of a community.
Ineffective applications of information technology include those: that assume advanced
levels of technical expertise in the user, in which technology is intrusive or displaces
content, that are unreliable or difficult to maintain, or that merely provide high-tech
alternatives to traditional materials such as textbooks or blackboards.

Effective modes of learning include those in which the expectations and goals of the
instructor are clearly articulated, and the learning experience is centered in the
experience of the student. Inquiry should be non-linear, guided by the interests of the
user, and offer flexibility in the path of inquiry and the depth of investigation.

Throughout the workshop, common areas of concern were: appropriate faculty
development, determining both qualitative and quantitative measures of the effectiveness
of learning and teaching in environments rich in educational technology tools, wide
dissemination of effective practices, recognition of successful innovation using
information technology in education, identifying the cost(s) of the information technology
infrastructure, and defining the outcome(s) and challenge(s) of implementing small-scale
applications of educational technology on a larger scale.


                                              v
In addition to making “technology products” widely available to faculty, appropriate
technical support and training on the use of the product should also be available, such as
through teaching/learning resource centers. Most faculty will not be inspired to use
information technology if it requires tutelage from first principles or duplicates the
process of product development. Student participants in the workshop were also
frustrated by the assumption of technical expertise when using information technology.
Clearly, an appropriate balance must be found between “the human element” and the
technological enhancement of effective pedagogy. Effective practices will also develop
intellect and work skills that will serve graduates well beyond their academic studies
(e.g., teamwork skills, effective communication, critical thinking, motivation). However,
most workshop participants conceded that before these benefits can be fully realized,
much more research is required on the learning process itself, including long-term
longitudinal studies on the effects of technology-enhanced programs.

While many mechanisms for disseminating “best practices” in the use of information
technology currently exist (e.g., journals, conferences, professional societies), there
was a renewed call to change an academic culture that views research on education
and the use of education technology as incidental or secondary to more traditional
avenues of research. Innovative use of information technology and successful research
on educational practices should be equally included within the professional recognition of
faculty, not as a peripheral and unglamorous task for the most enthusiastic and inspired.
Peer review and other means should be used to provide a measure of quality control and
recognition. The best exemplars must be promoted widely, and beyond traditional
disciplinary or institutional boundaries.

Colleges and universities must recognize that, increasingly, the influence and demands of
their respective information technology ventures extend beyond the campus to include
remote or distance learners, part-time students, collaborations with industry and
consortia of other institutions. If the construction of a unified information technology
infrastructure is to be cost-effective and responsive to the needs of all its users, the
technology developed and implemented must demonstrate definable benefits to higher
education. Specific education technology tools must also, as appropriate, be applicable
across many disciplines or course levels, must operate reliably across many platforms,
and be maintainable as the underlying technology changes.

Second-stage implementation funding of quality efforts, standardization of access, and a
careful consideration of the benefits and pitfalls of prior attempts at similar outcomes will
all help to ensure that the direction taken represents a unified effort with a minimum of
backtracking or reinvention. Whatever the form or content of the national information
technology infrastructure, the recognition and support of the National Science Foundation
was seen as critical in identifying, coordinating, and representing impartially the various
stakeholders involved.




                                              vi
                                          Introduction

    The past decade has witnessed spectacular improvements in the computational
    capabilities of calculators and computers, and more recently, stunning advances in their
    communication capabilities. The marriage of these two functional modes has produced
    powerful information technology tools that have important implications for undergraduate
    education in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SME&T).

      •   First, these tools can enable students to simulate, visualize, model, and experiment
          with complex, real-world scientific problems, thus promoting exploratory and
          inquiry-based modes of learning.

      •   Second, information technologyand within this broader designation, educational,
          instructional, or learning technologies, as applicablecan enable collaboration,
          interactive learning, and new pedagogical approaches that can lead to changes in
          the way students and faculty interact.

      •   Third, the rapid pace of change in information technology is increasingly impacting
          the creation, publication, and dissemination of educational materials.

      •   Fourth, there is a need to establish the true costs and implications of the
          widespread use of educational technology, as a distinct-yet-related component of
          the larger, national infrastructure of information technology.1

      •   Fifth, the use of information technology can, if it is made a high priority, increase
          access to high quality SME&T education.

      •   Sixth, information technology can facilitate connections across disciplinary,
          institutional, geographical, and cultural boundaries.

    Taken together, the computational and communication capabilities of information
    technology offer great promise for supporting continual improvements in all aspects of
    undergraduate education. They also underscore the need for credible research into the
    practical benefits and limitations of teaching and learning in settings enhanced by
    information technology.



1
  A recent and comprehensive discussion of the national information infrastructure (NII) is
provided in The Unpredictable Certainty: Information Infrastructure Through 2000 (National
Academy Press, Washington DC, 1996). The current workshop was convened to discuss
implications specific to the application of information technology to education, and the
ramifications for the education community. A distinction is therefore made to differentiate
educational, instructional, or learning technology as components of information technology.


                                                   1
The existence of these powerful tools and their associated infrastructure has also led to
questions that challenge the spatial and temporal boundariesindeed the very form and
purposethat have traditionally defined undergraduate teaching and learning. Information
technology now offers the possibility for learning and teaching to take place in new
settings and to inspire and facilitate lifelong education.

Against this backdrop it is also recognized that the backgrounds of faculty vary more
widely than in the past, particularly in terms of exposure to and competency with
information technology. The ways in which faculty conduct their classes and prepare
material for classrooms and laboratories are changing. Students are increasingly
expected and encouraged to bring new experiences and skills to the undergraduate
classroom, especially as a result of changes in the practices of the K-12 community.
Higher education must play an integral part in extending and enhancing the opportunities
offered by the use of information technology in this complex and dynamic educational
landscape.

To help provide guidance to the National Science Foundation (NSF) on issues of concern
to the undergraduate community regarding the use of information technology and the
possibilities it holds for enabling improvements in the undergraduate enterprise, a meeting
was convened by NSF’s Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) on April 18-20,
1996, entitled Information Technology: A Workshop on its Impact on Teaching and
Learning in Undergraduate Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
Education. This meeting brought together approximately thirty-five participants
representing a cross-section of the broader undergraduate educational community,
including faculty, students, academic administrators, publishers, and representatives
from the information technology industry. The primary purposes of the workshop were:

   •   to identify examples of effective uses of information technology and education
       technology;
   •   to consider the impact of using information technology on various parts of the
       undergraduate enterprise;
   •   to investigate issues of dissemination and of evaluation that arise with the use of
       information technology; and
   •   to speculate on and help NSF anticipate the impact of future developments.


                                Workshop Organization

Prior to the meeting, participants communicated with each other in an open forum via
electronic mail. This listserv enabled attendees to calibrate their vocabulary and
experience the use of information technology, and to identify overarching themes and
common issues in advance of the meeting. This exchange is summarized in Section I of
these proceedings. The workshop itself was organized around a series of concurrent
small group discussions. The format of the workshop and the questions used to facilitate




                                              2
    discussion are summarized in Section II.2 Finally, the outcomes of these discussions and
    recommendations for a follow-up to this process are summarized in Sections III and IV.

    The overall workshop structure is diagrammed in Figure 1 on page 13. In the first of four
    breakout sessions, participants gathered in groups representing their current or principal
    affiliation (e.g., a student group, three faculty groups, a publisher group and an academic
    administrator/IT professional group) to engage in discussion guided by two questions:

      1. What comprises information technology and what are some general categories
         for organizing its components?
      2. In each of these categories, what is an example of “an effective use" of
         information technology?
    This session was followed by discussions on evaluation and dissemination criteria for
    information technology. Questions considered during this segment were:

      1. What assumptions about the modes of learning or teaching underlie what is
         thought of as an effective use of information technology?
      2. What criteria are, or should be, used when evaluating the impact on learning or
         teaching of a proposed information technology tool?
      3. What criteria are, or should be, available to assess the degree to which
         information technology enables students to determine what and how they learn?
      4. What research questions3 or issues are implied by the above questions?
      5. What criteria should be emphasized when evaluating a dissemination
         mechanism that proposes to exploit information technology in some way? Do
         these criteria change as new technology and tools are developed? If so, in what
         way?
      6. Are there new publication and/or dissemination paradigms afforded by the use of
         information technology, and if so, what criteria should be used to evaluate their
         effectiveness?
    Based on reports from this second session, themes for further discussion were
    identified by the participants, who organized themselves into a third set of concurrent
    breakout groups that focused on the following topics:

      •   Faculty development for the use of information technology;
      •   The consequences of using information technologymeasurement, assessment,
          and standards;
      •   Sustaining communities of information technology developers and users;
      •   Non-traditional paradigms in teaching and learning fostered by information
          technology; and

2
  The discussion questions provided at the workshop have been nominally edited for presentation
in these proceedings, to reflect the clarification and revision of verbiage and issues resulting from
the group discussion.
3
   For example, research into the effectiveness of learning facilitated by information or
educational technology, evaluation questions, etc.


                                                  3
  •   Dissemination of teaching and learning models enhanced by information
      technology.

During the last breakout session, participants focused their attention on future directions
and recommendations, with a goal of developing a set of "needs for the undergraduate
community" pertaining to the use of information technology. The following tasks and
questions were posed to help facilitate the discussion:

  •   Identify four or five important needs and/or issues to be addressed by or
      impacting on the various constituencies in the undergraduate enterprise, given
      the current state of information technology.
  •   Identify four or five important needs and/or issues to be addressed by or
      impacting on the various constituencies in the undergraduate enterprise, given
      possible future directions of information technology.
  •   What research needs to be done to give validity to appropriate uses of
      information technology?
  •   What are the implications of widespread use of current information technology on
      an institution's infrastructure, both human and financial?
  •   What will be the implications of the possible future directions of information
      technology?

This discussion continued via the listserv for several months following the workshop and
we have tried as far as possible to synthesize and include these follow-up
considerations in these proceedings. On behalf of the National Science Foundation, we
wish to thank the workshop participants and the administrative staff for supporting this
effort, and for helping to craft these recommendations for further courses of action.

The rapid and seemingly ubiquitous increase in “the role of technology” in the halls of
higher education has raised many justifiable concerns – will technology displace
essential person-to-person and face-to-face interaction? – will technology intrude on
content? – is the rush to embrace tomorrow’s technology preventing us from analyzing
and refining our use of today’s technology? – will time and dollars be spent on
technology at the expense of less glamorous but more fundamental components of the
educational enterprise? This workshop was convened to discuss the coherent,
thoughtful, and responsible use of information technology tools together with other tools
in the classroom. Our ultimate purpose is to assure and enhance the educational
experience of students.

Lee L. Zia
Michael C. Mulder
Information Technology Workshop Organizing Committee
NSF Division of Undergraduate Education
April, 1997
Arlington, VA




                                             4
5
I: The Discussion Begins
Two weeks prior to the meeting, a listserv was established to gain an understanding of
the concerns of the invited constituents and their respective interests in the content of
the upcoming workshop. It also served to reveal differences in vocabulary and thus
facilitate discussion among the diverse assemblage of stakeholders.

Participants were asked to provide 2-3 major issues they would like to see discussed at
the workshop. This section summarizes the more notable developments of the pre-
workshop discussion in order to 1) place in context the agenda of the resulting
workshop; and 2) present the issues of principal concern or “preconceptions” on the
use of information technology in undergraduate education from the perspective of the
various and distinct stakeholders prior to meeting to discuss a national perspective. The
discussion was subsequently organized into several common themes, which serve as
headings for the following subsections.

                                  Definition of Terms
A concise definition of information technology was sought by many participants.
Recognizing the breadth of materials and concepts suggested by such an “umbrella”
term, information technology was taken to represent the confluence of
telecommunication, video, and computing technology or rather technologies which
support a diversity of applications (e.g., microcomputer-based specialty software
applications, video, multimedia, the Internet, World Wide Web, etc.). Alternately, the term
educational technology was proposed, and offered to mean “the systematic application
of human and technological resources in teaching and learning.” Within educational
technology, tools might further be subdivided into instructional technology and learning
technology, depending upon whether their use is centered in the delivery of material or
its comprehension. For many workshop participants, learning technology was a
preferred term, connoting as it does education centered in the students’ experience. For
the ensuing discussion, it was typically “educational technology” to which the
correspondents referred, although the term was often used interchangeably with the
more generic “information technology.”

                                     Access for All
There was a call for discussion about whether information technology can clearly
improve the access of students to a quality education experience, or whether less-than-
universal access will heighten the current disparity in facilities and connectivity. A “fair
use” policy should be articulated to enable the maximum use of information technology
for teaching and learning (i.e., educational technology, from the above definitions).

                         Benefits to Teaching and Learning
The benefits to teaching and learning related to the use of information technology at the
undergraduate level should be identified. Once identified, strategies for implementing their
maximum effect should be addressed. Are any new modes of teaching/learning
particularly facilitated by information technology? At least one listserv participant called
for more research into the demonstrable effects of using information technology to




                                              6
    facilitate learning. Further, what effect is the World Wide Web and the assorted campus
    intranets having on today’s institutional culture?4

                                   Experience and Expertise
    How can faculty be engaged and encouraged to use information technology, and once
    so inspired, to use it properly and to the fullest potential? Who should be responsible for
    educating students and faculty in the use of educational technology, and in what
    context? For their part, students should be inspired to become producers of information,
    not simply consumers or interpreters of the efforts of others.               As with any
    teaching/learning device, information technology tools can be used in different ways by
    different people in different contexts. They can be misused or used improperly,
    propagating the same ineffective practices in new ways. How can we ascertain true
    interaction in the student’s learning experience, and whether the application of
    information technology is serving to educate and inspire, not simply entrance.
    Conversely, the effective use of information technology not only enhances the quality of
    the educational experience, but may also aspire to “level the playing field” between
    institutions as well as between professors and students. Beyond academe, there is an
    increased need for partnerships between colleges and universities and the business
    community. Industrial growth can be limited by an insufficient supply of “technically
    savvy, professionally agile” graduates; conversely, institutions often lack the funds and
    facilities to provide their faculty and students with hands-on experience with leading-
    edge technology in the latest industry applications.

                         Infrastructure for Information Technology
    At the nexus of the infrastructure issue was the question of how to establish and
    maintain a system that efficiently meets the current requirements of an institution or
    institutions, can be broadly implemented, and will be flexible and accommodating to the
    technologies of the future. Who shall be responsible for developing information
    technology tools (e.g., authoring systems) so as to optimize the cost/benefit of using
    information technology in teaching? Are academic institutions assumed to be the nucleus
    of this “new education”? What preparation, training, facilities will be needed to assist
    departments and faculty to make the best use of information technology? In many cases,
    entire curricula may need to be redesigned, from those that rely on passive (e.g., lecture
    style) formats to those employing active, hands-on methods. Installation and upgrading
    (of facilities, computers, peripherals, network connections, software) also requires firm
    commitments to educational technology by the institutions themselves not only
    financially, but in consideration of the time required to install and maintain these devices.
    How will the use of such technologies modify the notion of a “university” and how might
    the tripartite role of computerscomputation, communication, and collaborationredefine
    learning environments? If the promise of the Internet includes the “virtual” university,
    how can we ensure that the quality of teaching and learning is improved as the mode of
    education is transferred from a central classroom to individual remote locations?
    Undergirding the entire discussion of “structure” were issues familiar to non-educational
    applications of computer technology, namely cost, authentication, access and security.

                         Information Technology in the Classroom

    “Using information technology changes the timing of information flow in a class,” noted
    one participant, citing the example of a question or issue that could be presented at the
4
  The boon of electronic mail and World Wide Web browsers were specifically named by the
listserv correspondents as information technology devices with an immediate and demonstrable
benefit to the educational community.


                                                  7
end of one class, then discussed via e-mail or bulletin board before the next class,
enabling the use of class time in new or different ways. A counterpoint to this is
unreliable or temperamental technologysuch as a teleconference or particular
softwarethat fails to perform when needed, and consumes class time with technical
problems. Additionally, a call for e-mail responses to a given issue may produce more
spontaneous replies, but this input is rarely as thoughtful and well constructed as
traditional writing assignments. As other examples, graphing calculators, animation
software, and video can all be effective for illustrating and engaging students to abstract
or complex processes, but the understanding of those processes is not necessarily
revealed on later exams or in group discussion. The assumption that the enthusiastic
use of “educational” technology correlates to improved retention and conceptualization is
not always valid.

                Dissemination and Rewards for Successful Efforts
There was a call for making more effective use of the World Wide Web for disseminating
materials, including those products developed with NSF support. In a related discussion,
there was a call for proper rewards for those who develop quality materials and
concepts that become adopted widely. As with successful practices not based in
technology, there is also a need for increased collaboration and sharing of ideas,
nationally as well as internationally. The notion that successful efforts should be
disseminated is a popular one; the real issue is how such dissemination is to occur.

                              Roles and Responsibilities
Of Institutions and AdministratorsMany instructors are already extremely
knowledgeable in the potential and use of information technology in the classroom, and
as with any “labor of love,” are willing to commit the time and resources required to
achieve the desired benefits; this level of comfort and enthusiasm is far from wide-
spread on campus, and many listserv correspondents suggested the need for a
commitment by administrators to support technology in education, and reward those
faculty who effectively implement such tools. Specific rewards mentioned included:
hiring/promotion, tenure qualification, funding, and administrative encouragement each
contingent upon clear evidence that use of the technology provides an educational
experience that enhances and extends the use of traditional textbooks and lectures.

Of Instructors It is the purview of instructors to ascertain how information technology
can be used by instructors to maximize the benefit of the students. Is information
technology seen as an inevitable replacement for traditional instruction methods, or a tool
used primarily to facilitate understanding of complex or intangible subjects? Instructors
must not allow their principal role in the classroom to become little more than a monitor of
workstations, providing assistance in interpreting the output of educational machines.


Of StudentsIn consideration of the rate of change in information technology, how can
students be instructed on the use of today’s currently available tools and also engaged in
the design, creation, and application of the next set of such technologies? Increasingly,
students will need to apply evaluative and critical thinking skills to select useful tools and
quality content from the ever-increasing deluge of “data” purveyed to them.

Of SocietyHow will the widespread use of information technology in undergraduate
education be understood and accepted more broadly in the social, political, and ethical
context of society at large? How will the new generations of “knowledge workers” from
a technology-based curriculum be viewed by those (faculty, employers, parents) who


                                               8
    presume a college graduate should have a thorough tutelage in “fundamental content” in
    addition to current and relevant technology skills for the workplace?

    The volume and variety of commentary in the pre-meeting exchange presented
    workshop organizers with a formidable task: producing a short (but representative) list
    of issues addressing the most critical concerns and issues for detailed discussion.
    Finally, however broad-based or point-specific the conclusions and recommendations on
    the use of information technology in undergraduate education intend to be, the caveats
    accompanying them are not without historical precedent. As Steve Ehrmann5 suggested:

            “It’s useful to think about the impact of previous technological innovation
            on the education of their day (e.g., the impact of writing on the oral
            education of Socrates’ day; the impact of the invention of the campus on
            education that had depended on individual tutors.) You don’t need to be a
            historian to see just how wonderful and destructive those earlier
            innovations were. The issues they raised are similar in many ways to the
            issues raised by this newest round of technology: some people gained
            access while others lost, power was transferred from some people to
            others, some intellectual abilities were emphasized while others were de-
            emphasized, some faculty jobs were threatened while others were
            created, the nature of “content” itself changed, etc. …”




5
 Then with the Annenberg/CPB Projects, currently with the American Association for Higher
Education.




                                                 9
II: The 1996 Information Technology Workshop
The workshop was convened on Thursday, April 18, 1996, at the National Science
Foundation (Arlington, VA) and opened with exhibits and demonstrations by several
participants (see Appended list).

                    Opening Remarks and the Charge from NSF

This meeting will continue the discussion already begun on the use of information
technology in the educational experience of undergraduate students. What is really
meant by “information technology”? What are the unique needs, concerns, and desired
outcomes required of information technology from educators and students? What are
the costs, benefits, and necessary requirements involved in wide-scale, long-term
implementation of information technology in our colleges and universities? How will such
advances change the quality of the students’ experience, not only while on campus, but
as they move on to become employees, parents, educators, business leaders,
politicians, and the future leaders of this country. Finally, how can NSF best serve this
community to ensure that its programs and activities adequately represent the collective
interest, as represented by its allocation of resources and the direction of future
programs and initiatives?

These are among the questions to be considered over the next few days. At the end of
the process, we hope this exchange helps all of us craft some tangible
recommendations for “next steps” and future discussions on this subject.

                        Description of the Breakout Groups

Workshop participants were assigned to one of six working groups, which met over four
thematic breakout sessions. Each group was charged with preparing and presenting a
summary of the group’s deliberation. For three of the sessions, this discussion was
based on a set of guiding questions provided by the workshop organizing committee; in
the fourth session, items of particular concern to the group were discussed. A group
leader then presented the breakout group’s findings to all participants during the plenary
sessions.

• The following sections summarize the outcomes and recommendations of free-
   ranging, multifaceted discussion directed by the groups themselves. For clarity in
   presentation for these proceedings, the groups’ comments and conclusions have
   been combined and organized into the resulting common, overriding themes. The
   subheadings and division are therefore those of the participants, not an itemized list
   prepared by the workshop organizers.




                                            10
                         Information Technology:
          A Workshop on its Impact on Teaching and Learning in
Undergraduate Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education

                                April 18-20, 1996
                          National Science Foundation
                                 Arlington, VA

                              Workshop Agenda

                               Thursday, April 18

5:30 - 6:30 PM    Reception.
6:30 -7:30 PM     Demonstrations/Exhibits.
7:30 - 8:00 PM    Welcoming Remarks and the charge from NSF.
8:00 - 9:15 PM    Breakout Session I:
                  Background-specific working groups for initial discussion and group
                  “calibration” on important categories of information technology use.

                                 Friday, April 19

8:00 - 8:45 AM    Plenary Session
                  Reports from Thursday evening breakouts
9:00 - 11:15 AM   Breakout Session II:
                  Groups meet to consider initial set of questions/themes. Evaluation
                  of effective uses of Information technology for teaching and learning
                  and evaluation of effective uses of information technology for
                  disseminating material and information.
11:30 AM -        Plenary Session
noon              Groups report on preliminary recommendations and criteria, and
                  identify 2-3 themes for further discussion in the afternoon session.
1:15 - 3:30 PM    Breakout Session III:
                  New “thematic” groups convene
3:30 - 4:00 PM    Plenary Session
                  Summary reports from thematic working groups
4:00 - 5:30 PM    Further discussion by thematic groups, initial development of
                  recommendations.

                                Saturday, April 20

9:00 - 9:15 AM    General Announcements
9:15 - 11:30 AM   Breakout Session IV:
                  Breakout Session II groups reconvene to consider future directions
                  for information technology and develop recommendations.
2:00 - 3:30 PM    Plenary Session
                  Final summary reports and discussion.




                                         11
         Figure 1: Workshop Structure, Exchange of Ideas, and Constituents

  Day 1
  Breakout Session I - “Birds of a Feather” Discussion

                                                                                       Administrators
                     Faculty            Faculty         Faculty      Publishers
   Students                                                                                & IT
                       #1                 #2              #3
                                                                                       Professionals




 Day 2
 Breakout Session II* - Thematic “Drive” Discussion (diverse composition)
                                                                            Review of
        Overlying         Evaluation         Research     New/Revised
                                                                            Effective
       Assumptions         Criteria           Issues       Paradigms
                                                                            Practices
                   • What are effective uses of IT in teaching and learning?
                   • What are effective means of information dissemination using IT?


                                   Plenary Session/Review Discussion



Breakout Session III - Further Thematic Discussion (diverse composition)

    Faculty       Defining           Sustaining a       Standards    IT Influence on     Dissemination
 Development     Outcomes          Community of IT         for          Learning         of IT-enhanced
  for using IT   of using IT       Users/Developers     Reviewers      Paradigms            education

                                   • Development of Preliminary Recommendations



                                    Plenary Session/Review Discussion


  Day 3
  Breakout Session IV* - Future Directions
   Stages of     Critical Issues        Current     The Needs of                         Campuses
                                                                      Faculty
   Systemic       in the use of         Issues        Academic                           and the IT
                                                                    Development
    Reform              IT             in IT use     Institutions                      infrastructure
                               • Reconsideration of Individual Assumptions/Perspective
                               • Draft of Recommendations

      * Composition and membership of groups in Sessions II and IV was the same.




                                               12
                                   Breakout Session I:
                        Perspectives of the Constituencies
                                    Thursday, April 18 (PM)

Overview

This initial “birds of a feather” session brought together participants with similar perspectives in
the use of information technology to build on the pre-workshop electronic correspondence and
identify some basic categories for organizing and classifying the use of information technology
relative to teaching and learning. A specific intent was to define a common vocabulary that
could be carried forward in the subsequent workshop discussion.


Guiding Questions

•   What comprises information technology and what are some organizing categories?

•   Within these categories, what is an example of “effective use” of the technology?


Outcome of the Discussion

Defining Information Technology

•   Information technology broadly includes the computing infrastructure, the communication
    infrastructure, and by extension of these, the institutional infrastructure (e.g., multi-campus
    consortia) and the instructional infrastructure (a range of courses from small classes
    taught by one faculty member to large, team taught or distance learning courses).

•   Educational technology includes the application of information technology to assist in the
    delivery of information within the educational system.

•   Within the designation of educational technology, learning technology specifies applications
    centered in the experience of the student, while instructional technology is centered in the
    delivery of material by the instructor.

•   Categories derived to organize or differentiate the above should be based on the function
    of the technology, its intended user, and the goal of its use.

•   Other considerations include the process of the tool (directed/open-ended), mechanism of
    delivery (synchronous/ asynchronous), and medium for carrying information.



    Note: The generic “information technology” is used throughout these proceedings,
    however as applicable to the workshop discussion, it should be considered equivalent to
    “educational technology,” as defined above. Learning and instructional technology are
    mentioned only relative to specific tools or applications.

Information Technology is Used to Enable



                                                 13
•   Communication, interaction, and collaboration.

•   Computation, visualization, simulation, and data modeling.

•   Instruction, tutoring, and mentoring.

•   Gathering and filtering of data, consolidation of information, and derivation of knowledge.

•   Combinations of the above instantiated as multimedia, multimodal applications.

Information Technology has the Ability to

•   Provide access to world-wide resources.

•   Facilitate the accumulation, generation, and presentation of data.

•   Provide tools for analysis and modeling of more or deeper and more realistic examples in a
    short time.

•   Enable inquiry and extend the human capability to visualize, organize, and analyze data.

•   Provide immediate feedback to the student, either from the technology itself or the
    facilitator/instructor.

Effective Use of Information Technology is Characterized by Applications that

•   Stimulate students and engage them with the material, such as role playing simulations.

•   Illustrate the workings of complex systems by exploring cause-and-effect relationships, or
    demonstrate microscopic, molecular, or hypothetical scenarios.

•   Encourage collaboration with other individuals, teams, or institutions to coordinate a group
    effort while exposing students to different ideas and perspectives (e.g., electronic mail for
    communicating with classmates or instructors).

•   Foster development of critical thinking skills, visualization, conceptualization, integration of
    disparate data and resolution of patterns within data.

•   Utilize the World Wide Web for research, advertising, and posting material.

The above are possibly best used to extend, supplement, or re-enforce more traditional
presentation formats, not to replace them. A basic pedagogical principle carries across all
levels of technology: involving students in the process and design of exploration in all fields.

Other examples of effective use include: tutor/mentor applications, modeling, electronic
publishing, independent and non-linear processes, and global access to information.

“Effectiveness” is determined by how the application defines and achieves the intended
outcomes of its use, the ease with which its use is facilitated, and by extension, a minimum of
learning or set-up requirements by the user. However, the increased use of technology does
not necessarily equate to more effective teaching.




                                                  14
Ineffective Use of Information Technology is Characterized by Applications that

•   Assume or require advanced levels of technical expertise, or are vague or counter-intuitive
    to the user.

•   Are unreliable or require continuous, extensive, or unreasonably precise maintenance.

•   Provide only “high tech alternatives” to traditional materials such as textbooks or
    blackboards

•   “Promote interaction,” but deliver one-way or broadcast presentation of material.

Similar effective and ineffective attributes could be applied to the implementation of
applications.

Suggested Indicators of Effectiveness

•   Intuition/satisfaction of the instructor.

•   Student evaluations.

•   Reduced attrition/failure.

•   Increased grades and test scores.

•   Revelation and correction of misconceptions.

•   Students “turned on” to the material, not to the technology for its own sake.

•   Retention of fundamental/essential material.

•   Increased opportunity for exchanging feedback between instructors and students.

Additional Issues Raised

• How do we evaluate and support the development of lifelong learning, especially in light of
  the potential of the World Wide Web to enable “anytime and anywhere” access. For
  example, more attention should be paid to “just in time learning” and the role of colleges (if
  any) in providing it.

• Campuses are increasingly using resources off-campus and serving students who are off-
  campus. Many issues need to be addressed by campuses, for example, broadband net
  access in the surrounding community, redefining what their students do while on campus,
  and what those same students do when studying off campus.

• Community colleges typically have few students living on campus so broadband Internet
  access in the community will become more important for working adult learners than for
  students living in residential institutions. Without this broadband access, information
  technology uses will tend to be restricted. Student ownership of computers (or the lack
  thereof) are similarly more important to community colleges and comparable commuter
  institutions since students cannot afford to spend much time on campus. These are




                                                   15
   perhaps half of all undergraduates, so, as information technology use increases, serious
   equity problems may well emerge.

• Smaller colleges, facing increasing information technology costs and other costs, will face
  pressure to specialize their offerings and use information technology to collaborate with
  other, sometimes distant institutions to collectively offer a broad curriculum to their students.

• Large institutions will need to expand their markets. Well-known institutions will face
  increased, net-based demand (worldwide) for their services. Fixed costs can be more
  easily amortized with larger numbers of students.

• Institutions will have increased opportunities to employ high quality, part-time staff at off-site
  locations.

• Administrators need to be convinced of the positive benefits of using information technology
  in higher education. Tangible and practical plans for uniting the effort, training, and
  pedagogical missions across entire institutions must be found, and demonstrated.

• New technologies should employ new techniques that best utilize them. Information
  technology should not be considered as a “one size fits all” panacea.

• Overarching challenges include those of curricular coherence, quality, and control.




                                                 16
                                  Breakout Session II:
       Evaluation and Dissemination of Information Technology
                                     Friday, April 19 (AM)

Overview

Workshop participants from a wide variety of constituencies in the use of information
technology met to discuss the notion of effectiveness and dissemination of best practices. Of
particular interest were the mechanisms by which information technology resources can be
critically reviewed, then easily adopted and implemented elsewhere. The context of this
evaluation should extend beyond defining “what works” to a critical assessment of which
information technology resources are in need of further development, and how these
successes can be used in the construction of a national infrastructure for the use of
information technology in education, and potential governance of its use.


Guiding Questions

•   What assumptions about the modes of learning or teaching underlie what is thought of as
    an effective use of information technology?

•   What criteria are, or should be, used when evaluating the impact on learning or teaching
    of a given information technology tool?

•   What criteria are, or should be, available to assess the degree to which student
    determination of their own learning process is enabled by information technology?

•   What research questions or issues are implied by the above questions?

•   What criteria should be kept in mind when evaluating a dissemination mechanism that
    proposes to exploit information technology in some way? Do these criteria change in the
    face of possible future directions that information technology might take? If so, in what
    way?

•   Are there new publication/dissemination paradigms afforded by the use of information
    technology? If so, what criteria should be used to evaluate their effectiveness?


Outcome of the Discussion

Characteristics of Effective Modes of Learning

•   The experience is centered in the student and relevant to his/her experience and
    expectations.

•   The expectations/goals of the instructor are articulated clearly and rewarded appropriately.

•   Collaboration and effective communication is needed between students and each other,
    their instructors, and their teaching assistants.

•   While the individual is independent and self-reliant, work should be collaborative and team-
    based, with unique and balanced contributions by all members of the group.


                                                17
•   Inquiry is non-linear, guided by the interests of the user. However, frequent testing and
    assessment of the student’s progress should also be included.

•   The material should provide a choice of representations, cognizant of a variety of learning
    styles. Such things might include how the material is depicted, the level of background
    knowledge assumed, or the depth of possible inquiry. This is one way in which “high level”
    topics can be included in “lower level” courses.

•   The experience should inspire further or life-long inquiry.

•   Authentic learning and social interaction are included as part of the process.

•   Although several participants felt that fundamental or essential topics should be delivered
    and understood before being supplemented or enhanced with information technology, the
    use of information technology as a means of enhancing the primary learning experience
    was also viewed as an area with great potential.

Identification of Effective Learning Materials

•   The identification and rejection of bad products is much more obvious than differentiating
    between good and very good products.

•   Web site “traffic,” number of product downloads, content and volume of feedback to the
    author can all provide indications of a product’s merits.

•   The technology is appropriate and applicable to the problem or concept being addressed.

•   The ease of use, compatibility, expendability, adaptability, and authoring/development
    support of the technology should also be considered.

Methods of Classifying Effective Learning Materials

•   The desired outcome of exposure needs to be defined and evaluated. If desirable skills
    include problem-solving abilities, teamwork skills, communication skills, etc., these aspects
    must be what is evaluated, as by standardized tests.

•   The problem, process, and outcome of the procedure is clearly presented.

•   It is probably acceptable that not all products are peer reviewed, but where review occurs,
    the process is reliable and consistent.

•   Is the technology cost-effective? Does it add value to the educational experience? Is the
    assessment of learning consistent with the approach and presentation of the material?

•   It is difficult evaluating the true effectiveness of any teaching method until a satisfactory
    definition of learning is implemented.

•   Can the expectations and experiences using information technology at different
    types/levels of institution be expected to differ, as it does for traditional teaching methods?
    Is any learning tool equally effective in a wide range of settings, or like other pedagogical
    methods, does its effectiveness depend not only on product design, but on the efficacy of
    the instructor, the context of the presentation, and the learning style(s) of the individual



                                                  18
    student.

Participatory Design in Innovation

•   The students should be considered not only as “end users,” but also as developers, field
    testers, and evaluators/reviewers.

•   Developers and purveyors of information technology should never lose sight of the
    excitement of discovery and revelation on the part of the student.

•   The technology should be transparent relative to presentation of the material. The user
    cannot be expected to learn computer skills in lieu of the subject matter.

•   Publishers need to redefine their traditional role, become more involved in the development
    of products, and in the project cycle.

Innovation Must be Developed and Sustained

•   Interest in information technology is currently experiencing an upsurge of public support
    and interest, however this will be short-lived unless the technology can deliver
    demonstrable results in a cost-effective and productive manner.

•   “Celebrate what resonates.” Successful innovation needs to be passed to a larger
    community, for example, via professional societies to their members.

•   Would-be innovators should first be well-familiar with previous efforts in their area of
    interest.

•   As the next generation of faculty, graduate students have an important role in the process
    and should be included as developers, educators, testers, and disseminators.

•   User friendly “tool kits” that allow the translation of various materials onto a common
    platform would be a valuable asset to the academic community.

•   Collaboration that fosters partnerships and links together similar or complementary initiatives
    should be encouraged.

•   While such features as “engaging the student” and “inspiring life-long learning” are
    considered desirable, there exists little in the way of longitudinal studies to evaluate this
    kind of impact for programs using information technology.

Guidelines for Effective Dissemination

•   Be wary of catch-all solutions leaving the issue of dissemination to one technology, or
    waiting for “market forces” to drive adoption and implementation.

•   Ensure that appropriate faculty training is included at testing sites.

•   Encourage presentation, as appropriate, to professional organizations, conferences, and
    workshops. The dissemination process and partners should be identified in the early
    stages of “product” development.



                                                  19
•   The World Wide Web is an effective mechanism for dissemination for such things as
    images, text material, and technical support. Conversely, most software is still “too fragile”
    for Web distribution.

•   Provide feedback to the authors/developers over the Web. While the Web offers instant
    and comparatively inexpensive publication of materials, too many products are allowed to
    become “stale” or out-of-date due to a lack of maintenance or revision of the content.

•   Web-based products should be modular in design, and available to be monitored or
    reviewed. Further, will the peer review process slow the process significantly, or will it
    focus attention on the quality work being done while weeding out the “junk.” Could a
    newsgroup consisting of experienced users provide a more timely and relevant review
    than a single recognized adjudicating body?




                                                 20
                                 Breakout Session III:
                                 Thematic Discussion
                                     Friday, April 19 (PM)
Overview

The theme of this breakout session was identified by the participants themselves in the course
of the discussion.

Guiding Questions
•   Two-to-three important issues and/or questions were identified by each group the previous
    day, for further discussion at this session. These issues are summarized below.

Outcome of the Discussion

General Issues in the Use of Information Technology

•   There is more research needed on how people learn, certainly from information technology,
    but also from each other, and how these systems really compare to the traditional methods
    that some argue are inadequate.

•   Increased research is required into the effectiveness of information technology in the
    classroom.

•   How is information technology-enhanced learning different than other learning programs?
    And, if such enhancements are demonstrably better, how can these benefits be
    communicated to other faculty, institutions, and the potential employers of undergraduates?

•   Any set of prescriptive recommendations will depend upon the intended ‘user group,’ and
    the breadth of that groupas across an institution, a particular discipline, or as a
    requirement for a given course.

•   A three-to-four-year process in implementation and dissemination may be too slow to make
    the best use of whatever information technology is available.

•   A cadre of developers and users must be sustained, and coordinated between institutions.
    Publishers should help to find and define an “author pool.”

•   For innovations to “survive,” it will require a more concerted effort by professional
    societies, journals, and the support of agencies such as the National Science Foundation.

•   Performance, quality control, and standards for information technology developers deserve
    further attention.

•   The specific economic benefits and profitability of information technology-enhanced
    teaching and learning have to be presented to faculty, academic institutions, and industry
    alike.




                                                21
Local Implications for Institutions

•   Outcomes must be defined, including measurement, assessment, and standards for
    effectiveness and competency. This competency must be evaluated both in terms of
    generic improvements in learning facilitated by technology, as well as specific skills in the
    use of technology (e.g., database design, statistical analyses, systems administration).

•   These outcomes should be consistent and coordinated between all stakeholders in the
    production of graduates competent in the use of information technology.

•   If faculty are encouraged to adopt or adapt information technology tools, the institution must
    allow faculty time/leave for training, research, support, and follow-up activities.

•   The new or unique teaching and learning paradigms inherent in the use of information
    technology must be recognized and addressed. Restructuring of the institution both locally
    and globally is implicit in such considerations.

Global Implications for Institutions
•   How can the “learning curve” of institutions that have successfully and widely implemented
    information technology be communicated and emulated by other institutions?
•   Best practices in information technology-enhanced teaching and learning must be
    disseminated, as well as details on the lessons learned from implementation of ineffective
    practices.
•   Evaluation of information technology must include not only the educational content of the
    materials, but its effectiveness at various types of test sites and over the long term, as
    determined in longitudinal studies.
•   With the proper encouragement, boundaries between institutions and courses will lessen.
    Access to primary sources of effective information technology-enhanced material, as in a
    national “library” with a common user interface, would greatly facilitate and expedite this
    convergence.
•   NSF endorsement or recognition of the successful integration of learning technologies into
    the curriculum will be an effective catalyst for change on campus. Funding efforts to
    communities may be more effective than to large, individual projects.


Faculty Development

•   Information technology must be made more accessible to faculty, and facilitated not only by
    proximity and ease of use, but also by professionally recognizing its use, and supporting or
    rewarding these efforts accordingly.

•   There is a need for information technology that assists faculty, such as authoring or
    communication applications.

•   Support for faculty development beyond individuals to departments, colleges, and whole
    institutions is also required.

Implications for Students

•   More students, and a more diverse representation of all students, need to be prepared in



                                                 22
    the use of information technology. This preparation necessarily includes exposure to
    modes of learning enhanced by technology, as well as specific skills to be used in further
    study and in the workplace.

•   Student access and exposure to information technology has benefits that extend well
    beyond the classroom.

•   Benefits and desirable skills resulting from an information technology-enhanced education
    should include: the ability to address complex problems, communication, teamwork, critical
    thinking, motivation, professional intuition, and a desire for inquiry.

•   The success of a given application of information technology should be evaluated not only
    on the degree to which the student is engaged by the technology, but also in the
    learning/work skills it develops, notably such things as problem-solving, teamwork, and a
    desire for life-long learning.

•   Industry needs to be more consistent and longer-term in the base of general technology
    skills they expect graduates to possess, as well as specific skills in the use of information
    technology, if relevant.

Issues for “Effective Dissemination”

•   For an information technology tool to truly be widely implemented, a common, cross-platform
    user interface must be defined and implemented. Single- or specialized-use Information
    technology should be examined especially critically.

•   Products that are under-used, employ a different language, are user-unfriendly, or
    ineffective obviously exist. Rather than hiding these shortcomings, make them known and
    propose how it could be improved.

•   Dissemination should be a consideration of information technology products from the outset.
    Promising proposals should incorporate projects ideas for effective dissemination, and
    prepare for a long-term commitment.

•   Publishers should be involved sooner in the product cycle, but should not be expected to
    fund the entire process. Recognition/funding by NSF of quality products could initiate a
    partnership with publishers early in the development.

•   Dissemination can include such low-tech methods as word-of-mouth, Web broadcast, and
    “freeware,” but proper support and instruction on the use of the product is also necessary
    if it is to be adopted and implemented easily and without repetition of steps.

•   Support for successful innovation should include second-stage implementation grants.




                                                 23
                                  Breakout Session IV:
                   Future Directions and Recommendations
                                    Saturday, April 20 (AM)
Overview

In the second generic breakout session, participants were given the additional charge, to
develop a set of “goals for the undergraduate community” with regard to the use of information
technology, perhaps targeting its various constituencies (e.g., students, faculty,
industry/business, campus administrators). These goals would be developed under the
assumption that they would present areas or opportunities for NSF to exercise leadership in the
use of information technology to improve teaching and learning in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology.


Guiding Questions

•   Identify 4 or 5 important needs/issues to be addressed by or impacting the various
    constituencies in the undergraduate enterprise, given the current state of information
    technology.

•   Identify 4 or 5 important needs/issues to be addressed by or impacting on the various
    constituencies in the undergraduate enterprise, given the possible future directions of
    information technology.

•   What research is needs to be done to give validity to what might be termed an
    “appropriate” use of information technology?

•   What are the implications of widespread use current information technology on an
    institution’s infrastructure, both human and capital? What will be the implications inherent
    in the possible future directions of information technology?

Outcomes of the Discussion

Research Efforts Should

•   Determine which components of the learning process are enhanced by the application of
    and information technology tool.

•   Identify the potentially negative aspects or impact of using information technology in
    learning.

•   Determine how information technology may change certain learning styles, or foster new
    ones.

•   Study existing successful models and determine what makes them successful.

•   Study information technology products potentially adaptable to a variety of learning styles.

•   Determine the impact of information technology on student assessment.


                                                24
•   Compile and categorize these results.

Evaluation Efforts

•   Must be open to unexpected outcomes, and consider both the positive and negative
    implications of using information technology for teaching and learning.

•   Should begin early in the product cycle, with test sites, pilot programs, prototypes, and
    mock-ups.

•   Can be created by continuing feedback on appropriately designed products.


                         Table 1: Information Technology on Campus

                                Infrastructure/           Access/Usage                  Required
                                  Equipment                                        Staff/User Support
 Communication             •   Telephone              • Electronic addresses     • Telecommunication
                           •   Voicemail              • List servers               s
                           •   Electronic mail        • Website URL
                           •   Videoconferencing
 Instruction/Research      • Network Connections      • Electronic                Models and training
                           • Display Capabilities       homework                in:
                                                      • Electronic                • Equipment
                                                        collaboration             • Software
                                                      • State-of-the-art labs     • Graphical/technical
                                                      • Plug-in classrooms
                                                      • Paperless courses
 Administration            • Faculty/Physical         • Course Descriptions      Coordination
                             Plant                    • Research                 • Across Departments
                                                        Opportunities            • Among Institutions
                                                      • Records
 Libraries/                • File Servers             • Search/Retrieval         • Electronic journals
 Research Collections      • High-level               • Office, classroom,       • Electronic
                             connections                and public/off-site        references
                           • Virtual sites              access
The discussion identified the minimum currently-available technology that should be available to all
undergraduates throughout the country, suggesting the future developments to be built upon this structure.
Answering machines, e-mail, and list servers can facilitate communication among students and between
students and faculty. Access to the World Wide Web allows enhanced potential for research and permits an
economical venue for posting class materials. Faculty have access to presentation/graphics software, A/V
projectors and screens, and support/training for such things as Web authoring and telecommunications.
Laboratory presentations present the best (most effective) examples of demonstrations, while “plug-in
classrooms” allow full connectivity to workstations and laptop computers. Remote access from dormitories,
public facilities, and home is also assumed.




                                                    25
To Facilitate Widespread Impact of Information Technology

•   The response time of faculty and institutions to changes in tools and applications must be
    reduced.

•   The need for up-to-date technology should not assume increased equipment costs.

•   Duplication of equipment and resources must be reduced.

•   Access must be dependable, and consistent among providers.

•   Departments and programs must become integrated.

•   The roles and responsibilities of faculty, students, and administration must be redefined.

•   More collaboration is necessary between academic institutions and industry.

•   Prevailing social, ethical, and professional attitudes of all constituents need to be revised to
    consider the use of information technology in education.

Issues for Education-Based Constituencies to Consider in the Use of Current Information
Technology

•   Support for the development of classes/laboratories that engage and interact with students.

•   Faculty enhancement and student development in the use of information technology through
    training/learning centers and educational support technicians.

•   Authoring/development tools that facilitate translation of materials more easily, and support
    for the use of these tools.

•   Guided, organized, and intuitive access to information.

•   Inequity of access to information technology-based learning.

•   The true costs of information technology and who bears these costs.

•   Small colleges will face pressure to specialize their offerings, and network these to partner
    institutions.

•   How will quality be maintained as prestige institutions face disproportionate demand for
    their services?

•   How will institutions respond to the opportunity to hire distance faculty, and will this lead to
    increased faculty employment, an increase in part-time or as-needed assignments, or a
    concentration of employment of those faculty most in demand?

•   All institutions will be challenged in terms of lowering the boundaries between courses,
    curricula, and institutions, control and accountability.

•   Access to information technology must be broad-based, extending off campus. Commuter


                                                  26
    institutions will face more rapid and substantive changes than residential campuses.

•   The expectations and process of learning off-campus versus on-campus must be
    addressed.

Issues for Education-Based Constituencies to Consider in the Use of Future Information
Technology

•   Cost of the future information technology infrastructure.

•   The role/mission of the university.

•   The role of the professor to that of a leader/coach in a dialogue or problem solving
    exercise, more cognizant of societal needs and those of the workplace.

•   Universal and equal access to learning, and how this will affect the leadership of the United
    States in education and research.

•   Information technology as a facilitator for interdisciplinary integration and communication.

Faculty Development in Information Technology

•   Information technology increases the variety of needs for training, including: the use of
    information technology itself, applications, teaching techniques, evaluation of available
    materials, indexing, and the training of graduate students.

•   This development requires multiple sources of support, including individual faculty,
    departments, institutions, professional societies, industry, government, and foundations.

•   Faculty development must be long-lived via communities of support.

•   Innovators must aspire to, and be rewarded for, increased efforts for dissemination of
    effective technology to commercial publishers and via professional societies.

•   The change in culture and infrastructure required can only succeed through long-lived
    support groups and communities that span institutional and disciplinary boundaries.

•   Wherever possible, the training should include hands-on use and application of the
    technology being discussed don’t lecture about the evils of a lecture!

•   Beyond the innovators and those willing to implement information technology (with or
    without proper support), there will invariably be a certain class of faculty who will resist
    any kind of change.

Courseware

•   The costs of information technology (and non-information technology) courseware must be
    reduced.

•   If costs cannot be reduced (as by smaller/cheaper books, Web-based “freeware”), can the
    use of texts and software be extended beyond a single course or laboratory by a more


                                                 27
    seamless or sequence-based curriculum?

•   What is the potential for server-based shareware, databases, etc., either between
    classmates or institutions? What is the potential for using the employee education model of
    the corporate community, or having them share/subsidize the cost of producing graduates
    with the skills they most desire?

•   Industry and academe should communicate and collaborate on which forms of information
    technology are used, and at what level of proficiency the student is expected to perform.
    These expectations should be realized in the use of compatible platforms and a more
    coherent transition in the use of information technology between school and the workplace.

Issues of Coordination Among Stakeholders

•   User groups, faculty, institutions, publishers, employers, professional societies, and
    funding agencies are all involved, and equally responsible for, the evaluation, appropriate
    use, and implementation of information technology in support of learning.

•   If institution-wide reform is a desired outcome, the parameters for proposals and their
    review must be considerate of more disparate collaborations, as with schools/colleges
    outside the SME&T ranks (business, the humanities), and shared fiscal responsibility with
    industry and the community.

•   Tele/videoconferencing and access to the World Wide Web provide good examples of
    such coordination with contemporary technology.

•   With the promise of distance learning, and the presence of students on campus
    increasingly part-time, the influence and access to information technology must extend
    beyond the academic institution into the community.

•   The reform process might be described as a four-stage process: Initiation, which for
    information technology included the innovators and visionaries of the 1960’s and 70’s;
    Contagion, or the promotion of information technology as “a good idea” through the 1980’s
    and 90’s; Coordination, where the use of information technology becomes standardized
    and widely available; and Integration, where the cost becomes nominal and access to the
    technology becomes assumed, even commonplace.

Other Issues Related to the Use of Information Technology

•   The balance between the use of technology and “the human element” of pedagogy must
    continually be considered, and determined relative to the true effectiveness of teaching
    and learning.

•   Will information technology ultimately enhance integration between disciplines,
    departments, institutions, and reduce the amount of inequity in the access to higher
    education; or

•   Will it amplify existing disparities, and create increased competition?

•   How can the benefits of information technology be increased while reducing the costs of
    using it? Is subsidized R&D required? Models for affordable technology should be



                                                 28
    presented widely.

•   While the use and perceived need for information technology is soaring, the requisite
    budgets for support and maintenance are not keeping pace, and the problem is becoming a
    crisis.

•   The information technology infrastructure is not free. The funding and competition for funds
    is a certainty; the direction of this financing is less certain. Profitability and cost-
    effectiveness do not assume a reduction in staff and other human resources.




                                               29
III: Follow-up to the Workshop
                        The Post-Workshop Listserv Discussion
Within days of the workshop, participants resumed their correspondence on the listserv,
based on the major issues and themes arising from the discussion. Among these were:
     •   the need for faculty development, both for users and creators of information
         technology resources;
     •   the increased need for a human and capital infrastructure associated with
         information technology and their associated costs;
     •   evaluation of the use of information technology; and
     •   the need for more research on the learning process as well as learning
         technologies.

NSF organizers provided “seed questions” for the discussion, including
     1. Given these issues (above), what subsets of the various constituent types
        representing the undergraduate enterprise ought to be included in this
        discussion, and how might these partners work together effectively?
     2. What are the different scales (both temporal and administrative) for possible
        solutions?

Defining Information Technology in Higher EducationPace University’s Jeanine Meyer
broadly divided information technology into discipline-specific tools, general productivity
tools, and instruments for pedagogy. With discipline-specific tools (e.g., engineering, data
modeling, and “bench science” programming) the issue of faculty development then
becomes more discipline-specific, and dissemination/training/evaluation could be facilitated
and coordinated by professional societies. A caveat to this designation is not to make this
pipeline too discipline-specific. Often a given technology is equally, if not more, effective in
an entirely different realm than its “intended” one.

General productivity tools (e.g., e-mail, listservs, presentation software) are widely
available, but still require proper technical support and instruction to be widely adopted.
Much of this kind of technology includes “business” software, which has experienced its
own learning curve in being disseminated and implemented in the business community
collaboration between industry and academe could do much to reduce the amount of
“reinventing the wheel” to be done. Instruments for pedagogy, for their part, could be
evaluated by research on learning and disseminated/supported through national and state
teaching associations and accreditation boards.          Except for the discipline-specific
technology, it is essential that the provision, training, and implementation of information
technology extends beyond SME&T faculty to include all educators at all types of learning
centers.

Faculty DevelopmentIf faculty are expected to adopt information technology in their
teaching, then the added value of using the information technology must be clearly evident,
and easily facilitated. One problem, a correspondent offered, is that too much information
technology fails to provide a “manual for delivery” to assist the faculty using it, which
provides user insights into applications of the technology and its inherent strengths and
weaknesses. While dissemination of effective products was a major concern, it was also
recognized that access to the technology far exceeds proper training on its use, caveats


                                                 30
on its limitations, and other details that can reduce time-consuming frustrations involved in
implementation of the product. The purpose of faculty training should not be only technical
competence (though this is an assumed side-effect), but rather how to extract the greatest
results from the available resources.

Departments and institutions, for their part, require a major reassessment in how they
recognize innovation using information technology if they expect faculty to adopt the
technology into their teaching. One participant drew the analogy that, if access to the
technology is the “carrot” to initiate a change in practice, the pressure to keep up with other
faculty efforts serves as a “stick.” Or, as Skidmore College’s Robert DeSieno observed:

     “… For most faculty, working in their discipline is challenging and time-
     consuming. Engaging digital technology is rarely as simple as using the
     telephone. Modern software is sophisticated, complex, expansive, and
     detailed in its requirements for useful application to substantive disciplinary
     problems. In my view, it is this interaction of disciplinary substance with digital
     technology that justifies consideration of this technology in education. But
     building the link is difficult, requiring mastery of detail that is time consuming,
     and worse, constantly changing as the marketplace drives the innovation in
     software.”

Faculty development activities should have improved student learning as their primary
mission, focusing on new or effective, established teaching/learning processes enabled by
the use of information technology tools, rather than creating high-tech versions of the same
bad practices. As one publisher of educational software remarked, “we are asked ‘how do
I change my course’ much more often than ‘how do I work this thing.’” One participant
remarked, “some of the most effective uses of information technology have been ones in
which faculty in diverse disciplines are collaborating in, or at least communicating about,
their work in information technology. Projects involving writing across the curriculum are
good examples, as are combined science/humanities courses.”

In talking candidly with their colleagues, educators have at their disposal a means to greatly
reduce the trial-and-error aspects of using information technology regardless of the amount
of technical support and training provided by either the institution or the information
technology manufacturers. Tool kits of user-friendly authoring/design applications that allow
educators to easily package their own materials in a manner more engaging or illustrative to
the student were proposed as a necessary and useful item for wise dissemination. Finally,
there was a call for graduate students to be included in faculty development activities,
serving to enhance and nurture the next cohort of educators.

InfrastructureThe World Wide Web was lauded as a mechanism for delivering the
materials to a diverse population. However, the benefits of this delivery is contingent upon
an accompanying training and support system for end-users. For there to be continued and
more substantive “community action” on the use of information technology, a greater focus
of effort is requiredwhether it be in a particular discipline, a given area of technology, or
in response to an established national need for such development and implementation.

While institutions and faculty have a paramount role in the use and application of the
technology, professional societies and associations were suggested as extremely
important organizations required to coordinate evaluation and dissemination, particularly
within a particular discipline. There was also a call for more research into the actual or
realized costs for various information technology scenarios to assist institutions in their
planning and budgeting. In turn, institutions could do much more to assist their distance



                                                 31
learning constituents by providing integrated access of things such as record keeping,
articulation of credits, and billing. Government sponsorship at the state and federal level
was also viewed as essential to providing coherence and credibility to the large-scale,
national implementation of these technologies. Several participants specified the involvement
of NSF as essential to coordinating this task - not only as a guiding hand or federal policy
maker, but also in “adding respectability” to local efforts while serving to coordinate a
system of nation-wide dissemination.

DisseminationOne participant divided the community addressing educational applications
of information technology into two camps: inventors and users. The inventors “are at best a
fragmented community,” and this intrinsic lack of communication can seriously impede the
dissemination of good ideas. Beyond its invention, innovations in the use of information
technology in education are not generally regarded as research at all, but rather, as course
development, service, or faculty development. There is little incentive for faculty to invest
time in the study and implementation of information technology to improve teaching unless
these activities are given equal credibility and potential for reward and recognition as any
other form of professional research. For their part, the user community needs to be
enabled, as by providing more comprehensive trainingthe role of the users should not
have to replicate or supplant that of the inventors.

To assist in the dissemination of information technology materials, the concept of a peer
reviewed, electronic journal was proposed. A good journal, many felt, would benefit
educators who want to improve their teaching capability, but do not want to become
experts in the technology (i.e., “become reinventors”). The Journal of Geological Education
and the Journal of Chemical Education are examples of discipline-based publications
which have long featured discussions about information technology applications and
improved pedagogy. Others titles submitted included: Interactive Learning Environments,
Cognition and Instruction, Machine Mediated Learning, Human Communication Research,
the Journal of the Learning Sciences, the Journal of Educational Multimedia and
Hypermedia, Computers & Education, the Journal of Educational Computing Research, the
Journal of AI and Education, and the Journal of Science Education and Technology.
Certainly there are countless more publications, bulletin boards, and conferences which
could claim a mission of disseminating information about information technology in education.
But, as with so much of the material available to potential users, it is unlikely that any more
than the most interested among them would have the time and inclination to stray beyond
their discipline to discover and research these products. Encouragingly, more professional
conferences are making room for presentations about teaching and pedagogy, and in turn,
these sessions increasingly present issues and results on the use of information
technology. However, this still misses the sector of educators who have limited time or
inclination to “keep current,” especially outside their own discipline.6 The sense of
“preaching to the choir” that these sources of information suggest may be one reason that
their effect is not more noticeable in the broader community. Again, the lack of recognition
for producing or researching such materials was cited as the main reason for their limited
group of followers. The Journal of Chemical Education, at least, has its information
technology/education contributions indexed in the Chemical Abstracts, hence these kinds of
publications receive the same credit as any other research paper.

While the community is calling for such means of effective dissemination of information
technology, NSF and other funding sources must appreciate that there are very real start-
up costs to such ventures. Similar concepts have been suggestedand attempted with

6
  As one participant remarked, those faculty most in need of seminars about teaching more
effectively are usually those who least feel they need such professional development.


                                                32
varying degrees of successwith numerous storage media (floppy disks, videotape/disks,
CD-ROM), and we would do well to learn from the successes and failures of these
attempts.

Evaluation of the TechnologyQuality and standards for acceptable educational
technologies were major considerations in the post-workshop discussion, and the
development of appropriate review criteria was suggested as a theme for subsequent
workshops. The users of information technology in education should communicate “what
works” to their professional societies and collaborate more closely with for-profit publishers
to assist in the dissemination of their work.

Correspondents agreed that the educational experience of the student should incorporate
more learning tools (both technology- and non-technology-based) that are open-ended,
inquiry-based, group/teamwork-oriented, and relevant to professional career requirements.
While information technology was viewed as a powerful and promising means to
accomplish most, if not all, these goals, the best method to review and evaluate the
technology was less clear. More detailed information is needed on the most recent
generation of educational learning technology, including whether specific products are
commercially viable, educationally effective, or uniquely valuable in some way that would
suggest further development of upgrades and related applications.

     “’Distance education’ in the past has typically meant broadcasting video of
     lectures, but that’s not really what an undergraduate education is all about.
     Universities also offer the opportunity for dialogue, for community, for sharing
     of resources, for new experiences. Current information technologies allow
     for a kind of heightened interaction (compared to video), and if high-prestige
     universities were offering this kind of interaction, then I certainly think the
     competition would be stiff. Who wouldn’t want to attend a chat session with
     a Nobel prize winner, with relevant papers, digital videos of lectures, and
     other resources on-line and linked-in? But on the other hand, it’s still very
     expensive to offer this kind of interactivity … It’s hard to keep up with the
     discussions, post new and relevant materials, connect the virtual to the real
     world lectures and assignments, etc.”
                                             Mark Guzdial
                                             Georgia Institute of Technology


Such evaluative information could in turn be used to assist state and national policy on the
implementation of information technology in support of better SME&T education. Moreover,
the technology should be evaluated over a range of situations and circumstances. As with
any instructional resource, some educators will make better use of it than others, and some
applications will benefit certain learning environments more than others.

      “State and national decision makers need a set of indicators, too: about the
     needs for change, the readiness (carrying capacity) of their states or
     regions for certain uses of technology, the current process of using
     technology, and the outcomes of the new educational strategies that the
     education is supporting. For example, regarding carrying capacity, they
     would need to know the degree and character of current technology use
     by both students (current and potential) and educators; when use reaches
     certain thresholds, it ought to be much easier to implement new strategies
     than if one tries to do that prematurely. Another example relates to
     software: decision-makers currently have little information about the market



                                                33
     viability of certain types of coursewarethus they don’t know if it’s
     appropriate (or useless or counterproductive) to try to fund pilot grants, to
     fund upgrades, to fund marketing, to fund staff development ... The market’s
     logic is not necessarily education’s logic: right now, by letting the
     “unhindered” market decide the fate of different families of courseware,
     we’re also letting the courseware market decide local educational strategy.
     If we knew more about the dynamics of the market, we could decide
     whether and how to use regulatory and funding policy.”
                                             Steve Ehrmann
                                             The Annenberg/CPB Projects

Rate of ChangeAcademe is generally viewed as slow to change, and reluctant (or at
least constrained, for a variety of reasons) to adopt new methods and technologies. The
professoriate and their support personnel is a large community to coordinate, and any type
of significant faculty development may take at least five to seven years to implement. The
most optimistic discussion produced a vision of technological amplification, wherein
innovation builds on innovation, adoption fosters further innovation, and community
platforms build on aggregations of innovators. Yet such notions ultimately require long-term
commitments of resources, with evolution occurring at a pace slow enough to allow
monitoring and constructive evaluation along the way. Events need to be aligned with the
academic calendar, and take advantage of intervals of lesser academic activity, when
faculty have the most time to participate.

Student Participants’ Views on Information Technology following the Workshop

Like their faculty counterparts, students identified the greatest benefits of information
technology not as the provision or demand of technical skills, but as a means of retrieving
information easily and reliably. Secondly, information technology that provides practical
skills (critical thinking, finding patterns, understanding complex processes) to assist the
student in their later lives was also considered effective. Students found information
technology materials useful as supplements to the traditional texts and lecture, and of great
benefit to self-guided exploration. Included within effective self-guided inquiry was the
provision of a range of depth and complexity in the presentation, to accommodate a variety
of comfort levels with the material. The potential to offer a wrong answer in comparative
anonymity to a show-of-hands or in-class answer was also considered a benefit of some
forms of information technology. While some students are comfortable, experienced, and
adept in using computers, the majority still claim not to be, and there can be a perception in
“high-tech” curricula presentation that grades are assigned on the basis of computer skills,
not understanding of the subject matter.

The information technology students were most familiar with included software and video
products. Access to the World Wide Web is another popular, though less prevalent, form of
information technology. Instructors were seen as valuable in explaining the non-intuitive or
shortcut aspects of the technology, which might not be obvious to novice users. But at the
same time, many instructors were perceived as being uncomfortable with explaining how to
use the technology and assuming a baseline or background understanding of these
“common” technologies. Many instructors, the students said, presume a certain degree of
technical ability (e.g., using the e-mail system, accessing the Internet), and the less
experienced students learn to use the technology from trial-and-error, other students, or
computer center technical support staff.

Although electronic mail has been widely lauded as a facilitator of “immediate”
student/instructor communication, at least one student found e-mail exchanges to be a



                                                34
depersonalized alternative to the classroom experience. Students who felt less confident of
their ability to write down a question somewhat expectedly still prefer to ask questions
anonymously in class than to present it in writing, signed with their e-mail address. Related
to the issue of “assumed knowledge,” an instructor who encourages class
correspondence via e-mail but provides no instruction on how to log-on and use the system
is not engaging students unfamiliar with the process. Instead, s/he may be perceived as
favoring some students while disadvantaging others. Among students comfortable with e-
mail correspondence, the technology was viewed as being much more immediate and
offered “around the clock” access to the instructor, a tremendous advantage over the
traditional office hours.

Technology that allows interaction by the student, manipulating complex systems with
“what if” scenarios was also considered useful. Discussion groups via e-mail,
newsgroups, listservs, or teleconferencing were viewed as useful applications, but rote
presentation of a lecture or other text materials using information technology was decidedly
uninspiring. Students often find questions or comments among the postings that address
their concerns or inspire new questions, and can benefit from browsing the material even if
they have no specific concerns and do not participate directly. Not unlike class
discussions, electronic groups can be dominated by a small number of enthusiastic
participants, hence this “passive learning” aspect of electronic discussions may still benefit
those members who prefer to “sit and watch.” Requiring all students to participate in a
discussion group was also not seen as an effective way of generating quality discussion.
A few students also expressed frustration in trying to present mathematical, chemical, or
similar formulae via a medium which operates primarily in monochrome and ASCII text.

Among other specific examples given, the use of video clips to engage, inspire, or immerse
the student (as in an historical event) was also considered effective. Many students still
prefer standard texts or watching a television monitor to watching video clips or reading
from a computer screen. Access to the World Wide Web and word processing/printing
facilities were considered beneficial7; regarding peripheral technology and software, user-
friendliness was considered important. Reliability of the system is also an important
criterionsystem crashes which confound a lecture or laboratory relying on the technology
are still too common. The start-up or booting/rebooting of many technology products was
also viewed as frustrating, too complicated, or a waste of instructional time.

Overall, most students reported having experience with “low tech” applications such as e-
mail, newsgroups, Web browsers, and videotape/disk, far fewer felt they had been
exposed to “high-tech” information technology, perhaps a subjective designation given the
rate of change in the industry, the disparity of resources among academic institutions, the
chosen field of study, and the student’s personal experience. There is still a perceived
predominance of techno-phobic or computer-inexperienced students that presents an
uneven platform for presenting information using technology. However, on campuses
where the use of computers had been expanded and encouraged, the number of students
“lagging behind” was much less. Significantly, while most students considered information
technology to be useful for engaging their interest or helping them conceptualize complex


7
 Cautiously beneficial, as such access may, however unintentionally, encourage clip-and-paste
plagiarism in student assignments, and the use of URLs or other “fleeting references” may make
source material especially difficult to reference at a later date.




                                                35
processes, there remained a strong sentiment that there is no substitute for personal
interaction with a competent and enthusiastic teacher.




                                           36
37
     IV: Recommendations
     Overwhelmingly, the response to the question of “who should be responsible for
     developing the use of information technology in the classroom” was everyone. This
     includes: government, professional societies, faculty, teachers, librarians, students,
     publishers, and designers/manufacturers of learning technology products. It was
     particularly interesting to note that, by the end of the discussion, the term information
     technology had been virtually replaced with learning technology, indicating the direction in
     which these resources should be applied.8

     This section summarizes the main observations and recommendations deriving from the
     workshop, including the group’s recommendations to NSF for further action and activities
     on this subject.

                           Define the Use of Information Technology

     Three areas were determined as fundamental and essential to the use of information
     technology.
     Need—

     •   Address the needs and requirements of future or currently excluded
         markets. The most important indicator may be one of needis the technology really
         meeting the needs of its entire, and intended, audience? Barriers may include proximity
         of the learners to the providers, schedule constraints, physical handicaps, assumed
         baseline knowledge, cost/affordability, learning style, and native language.

     •   Accentuate the teaching and learning attributes unique to information
         technology and its use. Desirable attributes of information technology tools and
         their use include: the ability to construct knowledge, consideration of disparate user
         background knowledge, self-guided, goal identified, encouragement of communication
         and collaboration, and peer instruction.

     Scope—

     •   Define the involvement of current users and predicted or probable future
         users. There is a need to see what, exactly, the current use of information
         technology is. Is there support for such systems? To what extent do the learners of
         interest actually rely on the use of computers, video, and telecommunicationsnot only
         in the classroom, but in their everyday lives.

     •   Define the current and proposed role of information technology in the
         classroom. Is information technology used at the level of a “luxury,” a “tool,” or a
         “necessary resource”?




8
 We are reminded here of the folly in being too clinical in our approach. “Shouldn’t a mission to
provide ‘student-centered education,’” as one correspondent observed, “be as self-obvious as ‘diner-
centered restaurants’ or ‘passenger-centered airlines’”?


                                                   38
Efficacy—

•   Consider, and be willing to adapt or revise, paradigms in teaching and
    learning. Different approaches to education are possible, and we must consider at
    what point the tools of one approach become the foundation of another.

•   Define desirable outcomes, then design and utilize instructional learning in
    a manner consistent with those outcomes. What are the outcomes noted by,
    and expected of, the graduates of technology-enhanced curricula? Are they better
    able to fill jobs based on their ability to use technology effectively in their work?

                             Promote Faculty Development

In order for all faculty at all types of institutions to adopt and broadly utilize information
technology, it is necessary for faculty (as well as graduate students, teaching aides, and
other complimentary instructors) to be recognized for their efforts in learning and
implementing such technologies.

•   Provide recognition and rewards. An emphasis on using information technology
    (and teaching in general) should be viewed not as an additional requirement, but as a
    shift in attitude in the most professionally rewarding use of the available time. All
    attempts to utilize more engaging teaching methods should be recognized, and the most
    effective of these should be rewarded on par with comparable gains in research.

•   The outcome of faculty development should readily impact and improve the
    learning experience of the student. Faculty development projects should have
    improvements to pedagogy as their primary consideration, and focus on
    teaching/learning processes unique to the use of information technology, rather than
    creating high-tech versions of the self-same ineffective practices.

•   Don’t require users to reinvent the wheel. The use of tested and reliable
    components can simultaneously lower the development costs and increase the quality
    of new curriculum material and resources. Authoring and development tools need to
    be more user-friendly and better supported. The learning and adoption process should
    not be a repeat of the original design process.

                                Encourage Dissemination
•   Recognize extant avenues for dissemination. While several mechanisms for
    disseminating these ideas currently exist (e.g., journals, conferences), the
    contributions of research in the use of information technology is not widely taken-up;
    one significant reason for this is the lack of credibility ascribed to experimentation with
    information technology, and research on effective pedagogy in general.

•   Develop new forums that best illustrate and showcase noteworthy efforts.
    In the short-term, an electronic journal of these kinds of instructional technology–peer-
    reviewed and interdisciplinary in scope, could provide a nucleating agent for these
    ideas.

•   Implement adequate professional review. Professional societies should develop
    the high quality journals (multimedia), conferences, and awards in information


                                                39
         technology applications to education. Quality standards need to be developed so that
         each contribution can be judged consistently.

                                   Implications for Institutions
     •   Recognize innovation in the design and implementation of information
         technology. Administrators and faculty need to recognize inventors and innovators,
         and consider this work credible research. Methods of assessment need to be better
         defined–as do quantitative evaluations of the learning process to assist in these
         determinations of effectiveness.

     •   Position the campus as part of the larger electronic community. In
         implementing the information technology infrastructure on campus, the links to other
         institutions and to part-time or distance learners off-campus must also be considered.

                    Recommendations to the National Science Foundation
     •   Continue to support and advise on this discussion. NSF should develop within
         discipline centers a critical mass of expertise to help faculty at all institutions develop
         and adopt information technology-based tools for improving learning. Included in this
         mission should be increased support of research into the learning process itself, as
         well as “technical support” that not only provides access to quality instructional
         products, but also assists faculty in its implementation at their home institution.9

     •   Promote systemic reform and multidisciplinary efforts. As part of the national
         dissemination efforts, NSF might do well to publicize projects and technologies that are
         more akin to “community building,” emphasizing the cross-fertilization of ideas resulting
         from a common technological platform.

     •   Support and recognize the use of technology in teaching and learning. NSF
         should allocate funds and resources to support research in information technology
         applications to education, and recognize/reward successful innovation with grants for
         development and implementation.

     •   Concentrate Foundation efforts. In general, NSF would do well to focus on

         •   Training efforts should focus on faculty, but where appropriate, should extend
             to graduate students and other faculty support personnel.

         •   Accommodating diverse audiences by supporting projects that “target” or attract
             more than one audience or group in the use of information technology.




9
 This “local performance,” mentioned one correspondent, tells little about how well the technology
will behave and achieve elsewhere, but it “can at least flesh out the envelope of possibilities.”


                                                     40
•   Research the learning process through increased support of research into
    empirical ways to test/measure the various teaching and learning modes, as well
    as the comparative success of information technology in enhancing these
    processes.

•   Provide recognitionof the innovators and leaders in the effective use of
    information technology.

•   Provide guidance and reputability by coordinating, and funding if appropriate, a
    mechanism for collating, reviewing, and promoting the dissemination of quality
    information technology products, uses, and ideas.




                                          41
Appendix: Workshop Participants
                     * Denotes Student Participant ** Denotes Exhibitor

Diane Balestri        Princeton University                                       balestri@
                      Dept. of Computing & Information                      princeton.edu
                      Technology
                      320 87 Prospect Avenue
                      Princeton, NJ 08544
Thomas F.             Brown University                                               tfb@
Banchoff              Department of Mathematics                              cs.brown.edu
                      Providence, RI 02912
Linda J. Bettis       TAP Multimedia                                         tapmultime@
                      P.O. Box 3338                                              aol.com
                      Silver Spring, MD 20918
Leslie Bondaryk **    PWS Publishing Company                              leslie.bondaryk@
                      20 Park Plaza                                                pws.com
                      Boston, VA 02116
Jackie Campbell *     Howard University                                          mswift@
                      Washington, DC                                       umd5.umd.edu
Patrick J. Cooney     Millersville University                                pjcooney@
                      Department of Physics                         marauder.millersv.edu
                      P.O. Box 1002
                      Millersville, PA 17551
Robert DeSieno        Skidmore College                                            siena@
                      Mathematics & Computer Science                         skidmore.edu
                      Dept.
                      Saratoga Springs, NY 12866
Stephen C.            The Annenberg/CPB Projects                               ehrmann@
Ehrmann               901 E Street NW                                             cpb.org
                      Washington, DC 20004-2037
Neil Evans **         Bellevue Community College                                nevans@
                      NorthWest Center for Emerging                           bcc.ctc.edu
                      Technologies
                      3000 Landerholm Circle, SE
                      Bellevue, WA 98007-6487
Don Farish            Sonoma State University                                 don.farish@
                      1801 East Cotati Avenue                                 sonoma.edu
                      Rohnert Park, CA 94928
Kenneth E. Foote      University of Texas at Austin                               k.foote@
                      Office of the Vice President for                     mail.utexas.edu
                      Research and Geography
                      P.O. Box 7996
                      Austin, TX 78712-1111




                                                  42
Louis Fox          University of Washington                            lfox@
                   Office of Undergraduate Education        u.washington.edu
                   Box 351209
                   Seattle, WA 98195-1209
Geri Gay           Cornell University                                gkg1@
                   Ithaca, NY 14853                              cornell.edu
Marc Goldberg *    George Washington University                      spiffy@
                   Washington, DC                              seas.gwu.edu
Mark Guzdial       Georgia Institute of Technology                 guzdial@
                   College of Computing                       cc.gatech.edu
                   801 Atlantic Drive
                   Atlanta, GA 30332-0280
Martha Haehl       Maple Woods Community College                     haehl@
                   Department of Mathematics                kcmetro.cc.mo.us
                   2601 N.E. Barry Road
                   Kansas City, MO 64156
Tom Head           Virginia Tech University                      tom.head@
                   Department of Media Services                       vt.edu
                   102 Old Security Building
                   Blacksburg, VA 24061-0232
Barbara Holland    John Wiley & Sons Publishing                  bholland@
                   Company                                       jwiley.com
                   College Division
                   605 Third Avenue
                   New York, NY 10158
Herman Hughes      Michigan State University                       hughes@
                   Dept. of Computer Science                    cps.msu.edu
                   5066 Blue Haven Drive
                   East Lansing MI 48823
Jane Humphries     Blackwell Scientific                              janeh@
                   238 Main Street                              blacksci.com
                   Cambridge, MA 02142
John Jungck        Beloit College                                  jungck@
                   Department of Biology                          beloit.edu
                   Beloit, WI 53511-5595
Kenneth R. Laker   University of Pennsylvania                        laker@
                   Dept. of Electrical Engineering      pender.ee.upenn.edu
                   200 South 33 rd Street
                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6314
Michal Liddel *    University of Maryland                           spiro@
                   Bethesda, MD                                wam.umd.edu
Jeanine Meyer      Pace University                                  meyer@
                   Department of Information Services   pacevm.dac.pace.ed
                   227 Grove Street                                       u
                   Mt. Kisco, NY 10549




                                              43
John W. Moore          University of Wisconsin-Madison                     JWMoore@
                       Department of Chemistry                           macc.wisc.edu
                       1101 University Avenue
                       Madison, WI 53706-1396
Brendan Muramatsu      University of California at Berkeley
**                     Berkeley, CA

Robert M. Panoff **    The Shodor Education Foundation,                        rpanoff@
                       Inc.                                                   shodor.org
                       628 Gary Street
                       Durham, NC 27703
Chip Price             Addison Wesley Interactive                                chipp@
                       One Jacob Way                                             aw.com
                       Reading, MA 01867
Martin Ramirez         University of California at Berkeley                  mramirez@
                       Engineering Systems Research                            cris.com
                       Center
                       Etcheverry Hall 3112
                       Berkeley, CA 94720-1750
Robert Ritchie         Hewlett-Packard Company                                  ritchie@
                       1501 Page Mill Road, MS 3L                            hpl.hp.com
                       Palo Alto, CA 94304
Larry Ronk *           SAIC, Inc.                                                  lronk@
                                                                  skipper.arltrg.SAIC.co
                                                                                        m
Clare Sager *          University of Maryland                                crsager@
                       College Park, MD                                   wam.umd.edu

Philip Sandberg        Dakota State University                              sandberp@
                       College of Natural Sciences                    columbia.dsu.edu
                       122 Science Center
                       Madison, SD 57042-1799
Jeana Scheirer *       American University                                    js7048a@
                       Washington, DC                             email.cas.american.e
                                                                                     du
Sean Simmen *          American University                                       sean@
                       Washington, DC                                     american.edu
Steven Wolf            California State University - Stanislaus                 swolf@
                       Dept. of Biology                               chem.csustan.edu
                       Turlock, CA 95382
Beverly Park Wolf **   University of Massachusetts                                bev@
                       Computer Science Department                         cs.umass.edu
                       5 Maplewood Drive
                       Amherst, MA 01002
Mark A. Yoder          Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology                mark.a.yoder@
                       Dept. of Electrical and Computer                 rose-hulman.edu
                       Engineering
                       5500 Wabash Avenue
                       Terre Haute, IN 47803




                                                 44
Dean Zollman   Kansas State University     dzollman@
               Department of Physics      phys.ksu.edu
               Cardwell Hall
               Manhattan, KS 66506-2601




                                     45
                          Notices from the National Science Foundation




        The Foundation provides awards for research in the sciences and engineering. The
awardee is wholly responsible for the conduct of such research and preparation of the results for
publication. The Foundation, therefore, does not assume responsibility for the research findings
or their interpretation.

        The Foundation welcomes proposals from all qualified scientists and engineers, and
strongly encourages women, minorities, and persons with disabilities to compete fully in any of
the research and related programs described here. In accordance with federal statutes, regulations,
and NSF policies, no person on grounds of race, color, age, sex, national origin, or disability shall
be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or be subject to discrimination under
any program or activity receiving financial assistance from the National Science Foundation.

        Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities (FASED) provide
funding for special assistance or equipment to enable persons with disabilities (investigators and
other staff, including student research assistants) to work on an NSF project. See the program
announcement or contact the program coordinator at (703) 306-1636.

       The National Science Foundation has TDD (Telephonic Device for the Deaf) capability,
which enables individuals with hearing impairment to communicate with the Foundation about
NSF programs, employment, or general information. To access NSF TDD dial (703) 306-0090;
for FRS, 1-800-877-8339.

Catalogue of Federal Domestic Assistance: CFDA #47.076, Education and Human Resources
  NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
          ARLINGTON, VA 22230

         OFFICIAL BUSINESS
   PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE $300
RETURN THIS COVER SHEET TO ROOM P35 IF YOU
DO NOT WISH TO RECEIVE THIS MATERIAL, OR IF A
CHANGE OF ADDRESS IS NEEDED. INDICATE THE
CHANGES, INCLUDING ZIP CODE, ON THE LABEL (DO
NOT REMOVE LABEL).




                                                NSF 98-82
                                                    (new)
